
# Computing with precisely timed spikes using polychronous spiking neurons

**Authors:** Laurent PERRINET

**Presentation type:** Poster

## Abstract

Artificial spiking neural networks have been used in the past as descriptive models for understanding neurobiological systems. Recently, normative models have been developed to mimic the performance achieved in recent breakthroughs in machine learning. However, the performance of these spiking models is still lagging behind that of their analog counterparts. As a result, it remains unclear why spikes have been favored by natural selection to be the primary means of communication in neurobiological systems. Recently, the emergence of event-based cameras has prompted the design of alternative algorithms that demonstrate increased performance when using the precise timing of spikes. Here, we follow an even more radical approach where spiking neurons can connect through a set of synapses defined by different weights and delays, and we coin it the polychronous spiking neuron model. We first show that such neurons generate raster plots that exhibit repetitive spiking motifs, as observed in particular in neurobiological recordings in the hippocampus. We then show that these models are ideal models for detecting such motifs. Results on synthetic data show that, compared to a model with uniform delays, the polychronous model is particularly effective in detecting mixtures of several of these patterns. We also derive an extension of this model to a real-world application of motion detection in the output of an event-based camera. By supervised learning, we show the emergence of spatiotemporal kernels similar to those found in primary visual areas. We show that the model is robust to pruning the lowest synaptic weights, inducing a 1000-fold reduction in energy compared to a dense representation. These results show that the precise timing of spikes may be a crucial component of neural processes that are currently neglected. The perspectives are to extend this polychronous model to multiple layers and recurrent connections.