# Mean Field Analysis of a Stochastic STDP model

**Authors:** Pascal Helson, Etienne Tanré, Romain Veltz
                           


**Presentation type:** Poster at [SNUFA 2025 online workshop (5-6 Nov 2025)](https://snufa.net/2025)

## Abstract

Analysing biological spiking neural network models with synaptic plasticity has proven to be challenging both theoretically and numerically. In a network with N all-to-all connected neurons, the number of synaptic connections is on the order of N^2, making these models computationally demanding. Furthermore, the intricate coupling between neuron and synapse dynamics, along with the heterogeneity generated by plasticity, hinder the use of classic theoretical tools such as mean-field or slow-fast analyses. 

To address these challenges, we introduce a new variable which we term a typical neuron X. Viewed as a post-synaptic neuron, X is composed of the activity state V, the time since its last spike S, and the empirical distribution ξ of the triplet V, S and W (incoming weight) associated to the pre-synaptic neurons. In particular, we study a stochastic spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) model of connection in a probabilistic Wilson-Cowan spiking neural network model, which features binary neural activity. Taking the large N limit, we obtain from the empirical distribution of the typical neuron a simplified yet accurate representation of the original spiking network. This mean-field limit is a piecewise deterministic Markov process (PDMP) of McKean-Vlasov type, where the typical neuron dynamics depends on its own distribution. We term this analysis McKean-Vlasov mean-field (MKV-MF).

Our approach not only reduces computational complexity but also provides insights into the dynamics of this spiking neural network with plasticity. The model obtained is mathematically exact and capable of tracking transient changes. This analysis marks the first exploration of MKV-MF dynamics in a network of spiking neurons interacting with STDP.